README.md, before:

# Filament

[![Android Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Android/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AAndroid)
[![iOS Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/iOS/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AiOS)
[![Linux Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Linux/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3ALinux)
[![macOS Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/macOS/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AmacOS)
[![Windows Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Windows/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AWindows)
[![Web Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Web/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AWeb)

Filament is a real-time physically based rendering engine for Android, iOS, Linux, macOS, Windows,
and WebGL. It is designed to be as small as possible and as efficient as possible on Android.

## Download

[Download Filament releases](https://github.com/google/filament/releases) to access stable builds.
Filament release archives contains host-side tools that are required to generate assets.

Make sure you always use tools from the same release as the runtime library. This is particularly
important for `matc` (material compiler).

If you'd rather build Filament yourself, please refer to our [build manual](BUILDING.md).

### Android

Android projects can simply declare Filament libraries as Maven dependencies:

```gradle
repositories {
    // ...
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation 'com.google.android.filament:filament-android:1.8.1'
}
```

Here are all the libraries available in the group `com.google.android.filament`:

[![filament-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-android/badge.svg?subject=filament-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-android)  
The Filament rendering engine itself.

[![gltfio-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android/badge.svg?subject=gltfio-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android)  
A glTF 2.0 loader for Filament, depends on `filament-android`  .

[![gltfio-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=gltfio-android-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android-lite)  
Trimmed version of `gltfio` that does not support some glTF features.

[![filament-utils-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android/badge.svg?subject=filament-utils-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android)  
KTX loading, Kotlin math, and camera utilities, depends on `gltfio-android`.

[![filament-utils-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=filament-utils-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android-lite)  
Trimmed version of `filament-utils` that does not support some glTF features.

[![filamat-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android/badge.svg?subject=filamat-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android)  
A runtime material builder/compiler. This library is large but contains a full shader compiler/validator/optimizer.

[![filamat-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=filamat-android-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android-lite)  
A much smaller alternative to `filamat-android` that can only generate OpenGL shaders. It does not provide validation or optimizations.

### iOS

iOS projects can use CocoaPods to install the latest release:

```
pod 'Filament', '~> 1.8.1'
```

### Snapshots

If you prefer to live on the edge, you can download a continuous build by following the following
steps:

1. Find the [commit](https://github.com/google/filament/commits/main) you're interested in.
2. Click the green check mark under the commit message.
3. Click on the _Details_ link for the platform you're interested in.
4. On the top right, click on the _Artifacts_ dropdown and choose an artifact.

## Documentation

- [Filament](https://google.github.io/filament/Filament.html), an in-depth explanation of
  real-time physically based rendering, the graphics capabilities and implementation of Filament.
  This document explains the math and reasoning behind most of our decisions. This document is a
  good introduction to PBR for graphics programmers.
- [Materials](https://google.github.io/filament/Materials.html), the full reference
  documentation for our material system. This document explains our different material models, how
  to use the material compiler `matc` and how to write custom materials.
- [Material Properties](https://google.github.io/filament/Material%20Properties.pdf), a reference
  sheet for the standard material model.

## Examples

![Night scene](docs/images/samples/example_bistro1.jpg)
![Night scene](docs/images/samples/example_bistro2.jpg)
![Materials](docs/images/samples/example_materials1.jpg)
![Materials](docs/images/samples/example_materials2.jpg)
![Helmet](docs/images/samples/example_helmet.jpg)
![Screen-space refraction](docs/images/samples/example_ssr.jpg)


### Applications

Here are a few screenshots of applications that use Filament in production:

#### Google Maps AR Navigation

![Google Maps AR Navigation](docs/images/samples/app_gmm_ar_nav.jpg)

#### Google Search 3D/AR Viewer on Android

![Google Search 3D/AR Viewer on Android](docs/images/samples/app_google_3d_viewer.jpg)

## Features

### APIs

- Native C++ API for Android, iOS, Linux, macOS and Windows
- Java/JNI API for Android, Linux, macOS and Windows
- JavaScript API

### Backends

- OpenGL 4.1+ for Linux, macOS and Windows
- OpenGL ES 3.0+ for Android and iOS
- Metal for macOS and iOS
- Vulkan 1.0 for Android, Linux, macOS, and Windows
- WebGL 2.0 for all platforms

### Rendering

- Clustered forward renderer
- Cook-Torrance microfacet specular BRDF
- Lambertian diffuse BRDF
- HDR/linear lighting
- Metallic workflow
- Clear coat
- Anisotropic lighting
- Approximated translucent (subsurface) materials
- Cloth shading
- Normal mapping & ambient occlusion mapping
- Image-based lighting
- Physically-based camera (shutter speed, sensitivity and aperture)
- Physical light units
- Point lights, spot lights and directional light
- Spot and directional light shadows
- Contact shadows
- Screen-space ambient occlusion
- Screen-space refraction
- Global fog
- HDR bloom
- Depth of field bokeh
- Multiple tone mappers: ACES, filmic, etc.
- Color grading: white balance, channel mixer, shadows/mid-tones/highlights, ASC CDL,
  contrast, saturation, etc.
- FXAA, MSAA and specular anti-aliasing
- Dynamic resolution

## Rendering with Filament

### Native Linux, macOS and Windows

You must create an `Engine`, a `Renderer` and a `SwapChain`. The `SwapChain` is created from a
native window pointer (an `NSView` on macOS or a `HWND` on Windows for instance):

```c++
Engine* engine = Engine::create();
SwapChain* swapChain = engine->createSwapChain(nativeWindow);
Renderer* renderer = engine->createRenderer();
```

To render a frame you must then create a `View`, a `Scene` and a `Camera`:

```c++
Camera* camera = engine->createCamera(EntityManager::get().create());
View* view = engine->createView();
Scene* scene = engine->createScene();

view->setCamera(camera);
view->setScene(scene);
```

Renderables are added to the scene:

```c++
Entity renderable = EntityManager::get().create();
// build a quad
RenderableManager::Builder(1)
        .boundingBox({{ -1, -1, -1 }, { 1, 1, 1 }})
        .material(0, materialInstance)
        .geometry(0, RenderableManager::PrimitiveType::TRIANGLES, vertexBuffer, indexBuffer, 0, 6)
        .culling(false)
        .build(*engine, renderable);
scene->addEntity(renderable);
```

The material instance is obtained from a material, itself loaded from a binary blob generated
by `matc`:

```c++
Material* material = Material::Builder()
        .package((void*) BAKED_MATERIAL_PACKAGE, sizeof(BAKED_MATERIAL_PACKAGE))
        .build(*engine);
MaterialInstance* materialInstance = material->createInstance();
```

To learn more about materials and `matc`, please refer to the
[materials documentation](./docs/Materials.md.html).

To render, simply pass the `View` to the `Renderer`:

```c++
// beginFrame() returns false if we need to skip a frame
if (renderer->beginFrame(swapChain)) {
    // for each View
    renderer->render(view);
    renderer->endFrame();
}
```

For complete examples of Linux, macOS and Windows Filament applications, look at the source files
in the `samples/` directory. These samples are all based on `samples/app/` which contains the code
that creates a native window with SDL2 and initializes the Filament engine, renderer and views.

### Java on Linux, macOS and Windows

After building Filament, you can use `filament-java.jar` and its companion `filament-jni` native
library to use Filament in desktop Java applications.

You must always first initialize Filament by calling `Filament.init()`.

You can use Filament either with AWT or Swing, using respectively a `FilamentCanvas` or a
`FilamentPanel`.

Following the steps above (how to use Filament from native code), create an `Engine` and a
`Renderer`, but instead of calling `beginFrame` and `endFrame` on the renderer itself, call
these methods on `FilamentCanvas` or `FilamentPanel`.

### Android

See `android/samples` for examples of how to use Filament on Android.

You must always first initialize Filament by calling `Filament.init()`.

Rendering with Filament on Android is similar to rendering from native code (the APIs are largely
the same across languages). You can render into a `Surface` by passing a `Surface` to the
`createSwapChain` method. This allows you to render to a `SurfaceTexture`, a `TextureView` or
a `SurfaceView`. To make things easier we provide an Android specific API called `UiHelper` in the
package `com.google.android.filament.android`. All you need to do is set a render callback on the
helper and attach your `SurfaceView` or `TextureView` to it. You are still responsible for
creating the swap chain in the `onNativeWindowChanged()` callback.

### iOS

Filament is supported on iOS 11.0 and above. See `ios/samples` for examples of using Filament on
iOS.

Filament on iOS is largely the same as native rendering with C++. A `CAEAGLLayer` or `CAMetalLayer`
is passed to the `createSwapChain` method. Filament for iOS supports both Metal (preferred) and
OpenGL ES.

## Assets

To get started you can use the textures and environment maps found respectively in
`third_party/textures` and `third_party/environments`. These assets are under CC0 license. Please
refer to their respective `URL.txt` files to know more about the original authors.

## How to make contributions

Please read and follow the steps in [CONTRIBUTING.md](/CONTRIBUTING.md). Make sure you are
familiar with the [code style](/CODE_STYLE.md).

## Directory structure

This repository not only contains the core Filament engine, but also its supporting libraries
and tools.

- `android`:                  Android libraries and projects
  - `filamat-android`:        Filament material generation library (AAR) for Android
  - `filament-android`:       Filament library (AAR) for Android
  - `filament-utils-android`: Extra utilities (KTX loader, math types, etc.)
  - `gltfio-android`:         Filament glTF loading library (AAR) for Android
  - `samples`:                Android-specific Filament samples
- `art`:                      Source for various artworks (logos, PDF manuals, etc.)
- `assets`:                   3D assets to use with sample applications
- `build`:                    CMake build scripts
- `docs`:                     Documentation
  - `math`:                   Mathematica notebooks used to explore BRDFs, equations, etc.
- `filament`:                 Filament rendering engine (minimal dependencies)
- `ide`:                      Configuration files for IDEs (CLion, etc.)
- `ios`:                      Sample projects for iOS
- `java`:                     Java bindings for Filament libraries
- `libs`:                     Libraries
  - `bluegl`:                 OpenGL bindings for macOS, Linux and Windows
  - `bluevk`:                 Vulkan bindings for macOS, Linux, Windows and Android
  - `camutils`:               Camera manipulation utilities
  - `filabridge`:             Library shared by the Filament engine and host tools
  - `filaflat`:               Serialization/deserialization library used for materials
  - `filagui`:                Helper library for [Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui)
  - `filamat`:                Material generation library
  - `filamentapp`:            SDL2 skeleton to build sample apps
  - `filameshio`:             Tiny filamesh parsing library (see also `tools/filamesh`)
  - `geometry`:               Mesh-related utilities
  - `gltfio`:                 Loader for glTF 2.0
  - `ibl`:                    IBL generation tools
  - `image`:                  Image filtering and simple transforms
  - `imageio`:                Image file reading / writing, only intended for internal use
  - `matdbg`:                 DebugServer for inspecting shaders at run-time (debug builds only)
  - `math`:                   Math library
  - `mathio`:                 Math types support for output streams
  - `utils`:                  Utility library (threads, memory, data structures, etc.)
- `samples`:                  Sample desktop applications
- `shaders`:                  Shaders used by `filamat` and `matc`
- `third_party`:              External libraries and assets
  - `environments`:           Environment maps under CC0 license that can be used with `cmgen`
  - `models`:                 Models under permissive licenses
  - `textures`:               Textures under CC0 license
- `tools`:                    Host tools
  - `cmgen`:                  Image-based lighting asset generator
  - `filamesh`:               Mesh converter
  - `glslminifier`:           Minifies GLSL source code
  - `matc`:                   Material compiler
  - `matinfo`                 Displays information about materials compiled with `matc`
  - `mipgen`                  Generates a series of miplevels from a source image
  - `normal-blending`:        Tool to blend normal maps
  - `resgen`                  Aggregates binary blobs into embeddable resources
  - `roughness-prefilter`:    Pre-filters a roughness map from a normal map to reduce aliasing
  - `specular-color`:         Computes the specular color of conductors based on spectral data
- `web`:                      JavaScript bindings, documentation, and samples

## License

Please see [LICENSE](/LICENSE).

## Disclaimer

This is not an officially supported Google product.

Commit message:

Add back proguard file for Android and update README.md
The proguard-rules.pro file provided by Jeff McGlynn (9fe60a636)
works perfectly for Android projects with minifyEnabled.
Add the config file back to the repository and update README.md
to help other Android users setup release build.

README.md, after:

# Filament

[![Android Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Android/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AAndroid)
[![iOS Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/iOS/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AiOS)
[![Linux Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Linux/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3ALinux)
[![macOS Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/macOS/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AmacOS)
[![Windows Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Windows/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AWindows)
[![Web Build Status](https://github.com/google/filament/workflows/Web/badge.svg)](https://github.com/google/filament/actions?query=workflow%3AWeb)

Filament is a real-time physically based rendering engine for Android, iOS, Linux, macOS, Windows,
and WebGL. It is designed to be as small as possible and as efficient as possible on Android.

## Download

[Download Filament releases](https://github.com/google/filament/releases) to access stable builds.
Filament release archives contains host-side tools that are required to generate assets.

Make sure you always use tools from the same release as the runtime library. This is particularly
important for `matc` (material compiler).

If you'd rather build Filament yourself, please refer to our [build manual](BUILDING.md).

### Android

Android projects can simply declare Filament libraries as Maven dependencies:

```gradle
repositories {
    // ...
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    implementation 'com.google.android.filament:filament-android:1.8.1'
}
```

#### ProGuard

Filament references a few classes from native code and by reflections. Depending on your
R8/ProGuard/DexGuard config and usage, you may refer to the [proguard-rules](android/proguard-rules.pro) in your projects.

Here are all the libraries available in the group `com.google.android.filament`:

[![filament-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-android/badge.svg?subject=filament-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-android)  
The Filament rendering engine itself.

[![gltfio-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android/badge.svg?subject=gltfio-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android)  
A glTF 2.0 loader for Filament, depends on `filament-android`  .

[![gltfio-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=gltfio-android-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/gltfio-android-lite)  
Trimmed version of `gltfio` that does not support some glTF features.

[![filament-utils-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android/badge.svg?subject=filament-utils-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android)  
KTX loading, Kotlin math, and camera utilities, depends on `gltfio-android`.

[![filament-utils-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=filament-utils-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filament-utils-android-lite)  
Trimmed version of `filament-utils` that does not support some glTF features.

[![filamat-android](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android/badge.svg?subject=filamat-android)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android)  
A runtime material builder/compiler. This library is large but contains a full shader compiler/validator/optimizer.

[![filamat-android-lite](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android-lite/badge.svg?subject=filamat-android-lite)](https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/com.google.android.filament/filamat-android-lite)  
A much smaller alternative to `filamat-android` that can only generate OpenGL shaders. It does not provide validation or optimizations.

### iOS

iOS projects can use CocoaPods to install the latest release:

```
pod 'Filament', '~> 1.8.1'
```

### Snapshots

If you prefer to live on the edge, you can download a continuous build by following the following
steps:

1. Find the [commit](https://github.com/google/filament/commits/main) you're interested in.
2. Click the green check mark under the commit message.
3. Click on the _Details_ link for the platform you're interested in.
4. On the top right, click on the _Artifacts_ dropdown and choose an artifact.

## Documentation

- [Filament](https://google.github.io/filament/Filament.html), an in-depth explanation of
  real-time physically based rendering, the graphics capabilities and implementation of Filament.
  This document explains the math and reasoning behind most of our decisions. This document is a
  good introduction to PBR for graphics programmers.
- [Materials](https://google.github.io/filament/Materials.html), the full reference
  documentation for our material system. This document explains our different material models, how
  to use the material compiler `matc` and how to write custom materials.
- [Material Properties](https://google.github.io/filament/Material%20Properties.pdf), a reference
  sheet for the standard material model.

## Examples

![Night scene](docs/images/samples/example_bistro1.jpg)
![Night scene](docs/images/samples/example_bistro2.jpg)
![Materials](docs/images/samples/example_materials1.jpg)
![Materials](docs/images/samples/example_materials2.jpg)
![Helmet](docs/images/samples/example_helmet.jpg)
![Screen-space refraction](docs/images/samples/example_ssr.jpg)


### Applications

Here are a few screenshots of applications that use Filament in production:

#### Google Maps AR Navigation

![Google Maps AR Navigation](docs/images/samples/app_gmm_ar_nav.jpg)

#### Google Search 3D/AR Viewer on Android

![Google Search 3D/AR Viewer on Android](docs/images/samples/app_google_3d_viewer.jpg)

## Features

### APIs

- Native C++ API for Android, iOS, Linux, macOS and Windows
- Java/JNI API for Android, Linux, macOS and Windows
- JavaScript API

### Backends

- OpenGL 4.1+ for Linux, macOS and Windows
- OpenGL ES 3.0+ for Android and iOS
- Metal for macOS and iOS
- Vulkan 1.0 for Android, Linux, macOS, and Windows
- WebGL 2.0 for all platforms

### Rendering

- Clustered forward renderer
- Cook-Torrance microfacet specular BRDF
- Lambertian diffuse BRDF
- HDR/linear lighting
- Metallic workflow
- Clear coat
- Anisotropic lighting
- Approximated translucent (subsurface) materials
- Cloth shading
- Normal mapping & ambient occlusion mapping
- Image-based lighting
- Physically-based camera (shutter speed, sensitivity and aperture)
- Physical light units
- Point lights, spot lights and directional light
- Spot and directional light shadows
- Contact shadows
- Screen-space ambient occlusion
- Screen-space refraction
- Global fog
- HDR bloom
- Depth of field bokeh
- Multiple tone mappers: ACES, filmic, etc.
- Color grading: white balance, channel mixer, shadows/mid-tones/highlights, ASC CDL,
  contrast, saturation, etc.
- FXAA, MSAA and specular anti-aliasing
- Dynamic resolution

## Rendering with Filament

### Native Linux, macOS and Windows

You must create an `Engine`, a `Renderer` and a `SwapChain`. The `SwapChain` is created from a
native window pointer (an `NSView` on macOS or a `HWND` on Windows for instance):

```c++
Engine* engine = Engine::create();
SwapChain* swapChain = engine->createSwapChain(nativeWindow);
Renderer* renderer = engine->createRenderer();
```

To render a frame you must then create a `View`, a `Scene` and a `Camera`:

```c++
Camera* camera = engine->createCamera(EntityManager::get().create());
View* view = engine->createView();
Scene* scene = engine->createScene();

view->setCamera(camera);
view->setScene(scene);
```

Renderables are added to the scene:

```c++
Entity renderable = EntityManager::get().create();
// build a quad
RenderableManager::Builder(1)
        .boundingBox({{ -1, -1, -1 }, { 1, 1, 1 }})
        .material(0, materialInstance)
        .geometry(0, RenderableManager::PrimitiveType::TRIANGLES, vertexBuffer, indexBuffer, 0, 6)
        .culling(false)
        .build(*engine, renderable);
scene->addEntity(renderable);
```

The material instance is obtained from a material, itself loaded from a binary blob generated
by `matc`:

```c++
Material* material = Material::Builder()
        .package((void*) BAKED_MATERIAL_PACKAGE, sizeof(BAKED_MATERIAL_PACKAGE))
        .build(*engine);
MaterialInstance* materialInstance = material->createInstance();
```

To learn more about materials and `matc`, please refer to the
[materials documentation](./docs/Materials.md.html).

To render, simply pass the `View` to the `Renderer`:

```c++
// beginFrame() returns false if we need to skip a frame
if (renderer->beginFrame(swapChain)) {
    // for each View
    renderer->render(view);
    renderer->endFrame();
}
```

For complete examples of Linux, macOS and Windows Filament applications, look at the source files
in the `samples/` directory. These samples are all based on `samples/app/` which contains the code
that creates a native window with SDL2 and initializes the Filament engine, renderer and views.

### Java on Linux, macOS and Windows

After building Filament, you can use `filament-java.jar` and its companion `filament-jni` native
library to use Filament in desktop Java applications.

You must always first initialize Filament by calling `Filament.init()`.

You can use Filament either with AWT or Swing, using respectively a `FilamentCanvas` or a
`FilamentPanel`.

Following the steps above (how to use Filament from native code), create an `Engine` and a
`Renderer`, but instead of calling `beginFrame` and `endFrame` on the renderer itself, call
these methods on `FilamentCanvas` or `FilamentPanel`.

### Android

See `android/samples` for examples of how to use Filament on Android.

You must always first initialize Filament by calling `Filament.init()`.

Rendering with Filament on Android is similar to rendering from native code (the APIs are largely
the same across languages). You can render into a `Surface` by passing a `Surface` to the
`createSwapChain` method. This allows you to render to a `SurfaceTexture`, a `TextureView` or
a `SurfaceView`. To make things easier we provide an Android specific API called `UiHelper` in the
package `com.google.android.filament.android`. All you need to do is set a render callback on the
helper and attach your `SurfaceView` or `TextureView` to it. You are still responsible for
creating the swap chain in the `onNativeWindowChanged()` callback.

### iOS

Filament is supported on iOS 11.0 and above. See `ios/samples` for examples of using Filament on
iOS.

Filament on iOS is largely the same as native rendering with C++. A `CAEAGLLayer` or `CAMetalLayer`
is passed to the `createSwapChain` method. Filament for iOS supports both Metal (preferred) and
OpenGL ES.

## Assets

To get started you can use the textures and environment maps found respectively in
`third_party/textures` and `third_party/environments`. These assets are under CC0 license. Please
refer to their respective `URL.txt` files to know more about the original authors.

## How to make contributions

Please read and follow the steps in [CONTRIBUTING.md](/CONTRIBUTING.md). Make sure you are
familiar with the [code style](/CODE_STYLE.md).

## Directory structure

This repository not only contains the core Filament engine, but also its supporting libraries
and tools.

- `android`:                  Android libraries and projects
  - `filamat-android`:        Filament material generation library (AAR) for Android
  - `filament-android`:       Filament library (AAR) for Android
  - `filament-utils-android`: Extra utilities (KTX loader, math types, etc.)
  - `gltfio-android`:         Filament glTF loading library (AAR) for Android
  - `samples`:                Android-specific Filament samples
- `art`:                      Source for various artworks (logos, PDF manuals, etc.)
- `assets`:                   3D assets to use with sample applications
- `build`:                    CMake build scripts
- `docs`:                     Documentation
  - `math`:                   Mathematica notebooks used to explore BRDFs, equations, etc.
- `filament`:                 Filament rendering engine (minimal dependencies)
- `ide`:                      Configuration files for IDEs (CLion, etc.)
- `ios`:                      Sample projects for iOS
- `java`:                     Java bindings for Filament libraries
- `libs`:                     Libraries
  - `bluegl`:                 OpenGL bindings for macOS, Linux and Windows
  - `bluevk`:                 Vulkan bindings for macOS, Linux, Windows and Android
  - `camutils`:               Camera manipulation utilities
  - `filabridge`:             Library shared by the Filament engine and host tools
  - `filaflat`:               Serialization/deserialization library used for materials
  - `filagui`:                Helper library for [Dear ImGui](https://github.com/ocornut/imgui)
  - `filamat`:                Material generation library
  - `filamentapp`:            SDL2 skeleton to build sample apps
  - `filameshio`:             Tiny filamesh parsing library (see also `tools/filamesh`)
  - `geometry`:               Mesh-related utilities
  - `gltfio`:                 Loader for glTF 2.0
  - `ibl`:                    IBL generation tools
  - `image`:                  Image filtering and simple transforms
  - `imageio`:                Image file reading / writing, only intended for internal use
  - `matdbg`:                 DebugServer for inspecting shaders at run-time (debug builds only)
  - `math`:                   Math library
  - `mathio`:                 Math types support for output streams
  - `utils`:                  Utility library (threads, memory, data structures, etc.)
- `samples`:                  Sample desktop applications
- `shaders`:                  Shaders used by `filamat` and `matc`
- `third_party`:              External libraries and assets
  - `environments`:           Environment maps under CC0 license that can be used with `cmgen`
  - `models`:                 Models under permissive licenses
  - `textures`:               Textures under CC0 license
- `tools`:                    Host tools
  - `cmgen`:                  Image-based lighting asset generator
  - `filamesh`:               Mesh converter
  - `glslminifier`:           Minifies GLSL source code
  - `matc`:                   Material compiler
  - `matinfo`                 Displays information about materials compiled with `matc`
  - `mipgen`                  Generates a series of miplevels from a source image
  - `normal-blending`:        Tool to blend normal maps
  - `resgen`                  Aggregates binary blobs into embeddable resources
  - `roughness-prefilter`:    Pre-filters a roughness map from a normal map to reduce aliasing
  - `specular-color`:         Computes the specular color of conductors based on spectral data
- `web`:                      JavaScript bindings, documentation, and samples

## License

Please see [LICENSE](/LICENSE).

## Disclaimer

This is not an officially supported Google product.
