docs_src/src_mdbook/src/notes/asan_ubsan.md, before:

# Running with ASAN/UBSAN

## Enabling

When building though build.sh, pass the `-b` flag. This sets the cmake variable
`FILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` which eventually passes `"-fsanitize=address -fsanitize=undefined"`
to all compile and link operations.

If building through CMake directly, or an IDE like CLion that doesn't use build.sh, instead pass
`-DFILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` to cmake in order to get the same result.

## Getting memory leak detection on Mac

Memory leak detection isn't enabled by default on MacOS. There are two issues to address, first is
using a version of clang that supports memory leak detection and second is enabling it at runtime.

The version of clang distributed by Apple (with a version like "Apple clang version 16.0.0") doesn't
currently support leak detection at all. Instead you will need to get or build a different LLVM,
such as the one distributed through homebrew and get CMake to use that instead.

Then during runtime you'll need to have the environment variable `ASAN_OPTIONS` include the option
`detect_leaks=1`. Multiple `ASAN_OPTIONS` values are concatenated with `:`.

## Getting memory leak output in CLion

### Setting variables

Under `Settings | Build, Execution, Deployment | Dynamic Analysis Tools | Sanitizers` there is an
ASAN Settings field that overrides whatever other `ASAN_OPTIONS` you might set elsewhere, so you
must use that instead of setting it through your Run/Debug Configuration.

To pass `-DFILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` to CMake you'll want to create a new CMake Profile and
pass it as a CMake argument.

### Avoiding losing output

CMake will consume ASAN output and display it through a separate "Sanitizers" tab. Unfortunately
certain leak detection errors that interrupt the executable seem to not show up in this tab, but are
still removed from the user-visible console output. If this is happening and you need to see the
unfiltered console output you'll need to go to `Settings | Build, Execution, Deployment | Dynamic
Analysis Tools | Sanitizers` and uncheck "Use visual representation for Sanitizer's output".

Commit message:

build: allow building tools separately (#9384)
Building tools separately is necessary for the existing
cross-complation usecase.  We generalize this by introducing
two cmake vars that enable exporting and importing
prebuilt tools.

The intended usecase is to enable ASAN-built filament without
having to run ASAN-built matc (which is prohibitively slow).

build.sh has been modified to add a `-y` flag forprebuilding
tools.

docs_src/src_mdbook/src/notes/asan_ubsan.md, after:

# Running with ASAN/UBSAN

## Enabling

When building though `build.sh`, pass the `-b` flag. This sets the cmake variable
`FILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` which eventually passes `"-fsanitize=address -fsanitize=undefined"`
to all compile and link operations.

It might be desirable to pair the `-b` with `-y release`. The `-y` flag indicates that targets
in `/tools` will be built separately from the filament target, and the filament build depends on
the `/tools` targets as prebuilt binaries. This separation reduces ASAN/UBSAN build time
considerably. This option assumes that the user is trying to catch sanitization issues for
filament and not the tools that are used to build filament.

If building through CMake directly, or an IDE like CLion that doesn't use `build.sh`, instead pass
`-DFILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` to cmake in order to get the same result.

## Getting memory leak detection on Mac

Memory leak detection isn't enabled by default on MacOS. There are two issues to address, first is
using a version of clang that supports memory leak detection and second is enabling it at runtime.

The version of clang distributed by Apple (with a version like "Apple clang version 16.0.0") doesn't
currently support leak detection at all. Instead you will need to get or build a different LLVM,
such as the one distributed through homebrew and get CMake to use that instead.

Then during runtime you'll need to have the environment variable `ASAN_OPTIONS` include the option
`detect_leaks=1`. Multiple `ASAN_OPTIONS` values are concatenated with `:`.

## Getting memory leak output in CLion

### Setting variables

Under `Settings | Build, Execution, Deployment | Dynamic Analysis Tools | Sanitizers` there is an
ASAN Settings field that overrides whatever other `ASAN_OPTIONS` you might set elsewhere, so you
must use that instead of setting it through your Run/Debug Configuration.

To pass `-DFILAMENT_ENABLE_ASAN_UBSAN=ON` to CMake you'll want to create a new CMake Profile and
pass it as a CMake argument.

### Avoiding losing output

CMake will consume ASAN output and display it through a separate "Sanitizers" tab. Unfortunately
certain leak detection errors that interrupt the executable seem to not show up in this tab, but are
still removed from the user-visible console output. If this is happening and you need to see the
unfiltered console output you'll need to go to `Settings | Build, Execution, Deployment | Dynamic
Analysis Tools | Sanitizers` and uncheck "Use visual representation for Sanitizer's output".
