test/renderdiff/README.md, before:

# Rendering Difference Test

We created a few scripts to run `gltf_viewer` and produce headless renderings.

This is mainly useful for continuous integration where GPUs are generally not available on cloud
machines. To perform software rasterization, these scripts are centered around [Mesa]'s
software rasterizers, but nothing bars us from using another rasterizer like [SwiftShader].
Additionally, we should be able to use GPUs where available (though this is more of a future
work).

The script `render.py` contains the core logic for taking input parameters (such as the test
description file) and then running gltf_viewer to produce the renderings.

In the `test` directory is a list of test descriptions that are specified in json. Please see
`sample.json` to parse the structure.

## Setting up python

The `renderdiff` project uses `python` extensively. To install the dependencies for producing
renderings, do the following step
- Set up a virtual environment (from the root directory)
  ```
  python3 -m venv venv
  . ./venv/bin/activate
  ```
- Install the rendering dependencies
  ```
  pip install -r test/renderdiff/src/rendering_requirements.txt
  ```
- Install the viewer depdencies
  ```
  pip install -r test/renderdiff/src/viewer_requirements.txt
  ```
- For the commands in the following section, do not exit the virtual environment. Once you've
  completed all your work, you can exit with
  ```
  deactivate
  ```

## Running the test locally

- To run the same presbumit as [`test-renderdiff`](presubmit-renderdiff), you can do
  ```
  bash test/renderdiff/local_test.sh
  ```
- This script will generate the renderings based on the current state of your repo.
  Additionally, it will also compare the generated images with corresponding images in the
  golden repo.
- To just render without running the test, you could use the following script
  ```
  bash test/renderdiff/generate.sh
  ```

## Filtering Tests

You can run a subset of the tests by passing the `--test_filter` flag to `local_test.sh`. The
filter supports wildcards (`*`) to match test names. For example, to run all tests in the
`ClearCoat` suite, you can use the following command:

```
bash test/renderdiff/local_test.sh --test_filter='ClearCoat.*.*'
```

## Update the golden images

The golden images are stored in a github repository:
https://github.com/google/filament-assets. Filament team members should have access to write
to the repository. A typical flow for updating the goldens is to upload your changed images
into **branch** of `filament-assets`. This branch is paired with a PR or commit on the
`filament` repo.

As an example, imagine I am working on a PR, and I've uploaded my change, which is in a
branch called `my-pr-branch`, to `filament`. This PR requires updating the golden. We would do
it in the following fashion

### Using a script to update the golden repo

- Run interactive mode in the `update_golden.py` script.
  ```
  python3 test/renderdiff/src/update_golden.py
  ```
- This will guide you through a series of steps to push the changes to a remote branch on
  `filament-assets`.

### Manually updating the golden repo

- Check out the golden repo
  ```
  git clone git@github.com:google/filament-assets.git
  ```
- Create a branch on the golden repo
  ```
  cd filament-assets
  git switch -c my-pr-branch-golden
  ```
- Copy the new images to their appropriate place in `filament-assets`
- Push the `filament-assets` working branch to remote
  ```
  git push origin my-pr-branch-golden
  ```
- In the commit message of your working branch on `filament`, add the following line
  ```
  RDIFF_BBRANCH=my-pr-branch-golden
  ```

Doing the above has multiple effects:
- The presubmit test [`test-renderdiff`][presubmit-renderdiff] will test against the provided
  branch of the golden repo (i.e. `my-pr-branch-golden`).
- If the PR is merged, then there is another workflow that will merge `my-pr-branch-golden`
  to the `main` branch of the golden repo.

## Viewing test results

We provide a viewer for looking at the result of a test run. The viewer is a webapp that can
be used by pointing your browser to a localhost port. If you input the viewer with a PR or a
directory, it will parse the test result and show the results and the rendered and/or golden
images.

![Viewer](docs/images/renderdiff_example.png)

To run the viewer of a test output directory that has been generated locally, you would run
the following

```
python3 test/renderdiff/src/viewer.py --diff=[test output]
```

where `[test output]` is a directory containing the `compare_results.json` of the test run.
For example, it could be `out/renderdiff/diffs/presubmit` for the standard path to the
`presubmit` test output.

To see the results of a Pull Request initiated test run, you would do the following

```
python3 test/renderdiff/src/viewer.py --pr_number=[PR #] --github_token=[github token]
```

where `[PR #]` is the numeric ID of your pull request, and the `[github token]` is an acess
token that you (as a github user) needs to generate ([reference][github_token_ref]).

[github_token_ref]: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens
[Mesa]: https://docs.mesa3d.org
[SwiftShader]: https://github.com/google/swiftshader
[presubmit-renderdiff]: https://github.com/google/filament/blob/e85dfe75c86106a05019e13ccdbef67e030af675/.github/workflows/presubmit.yml#L118

Commit message:

renderdiff: [viewer] add Run ID as a way to pull artifacts (#9272)
The viewer supports pulling artifacts based on PR number, and now
we support providing Run ID as an alternative to identify the
renderdiff run on Github CI.

test/renderdiff/README.md, after:

# Rendering Difference Test

We created a few scripts to run `gltf_viewer` and produce headless renderings.

This is mainly useful for continuous integration where GPUs are generally not available on cloud
machines. To perform software rasterization, these scripts are centered around [Mesa]'s
software rasterizers, but nothing bars us from using another rasterizer like [SwiftShader].
Additionally, we should be able to use GPUs where available (though this is more of a future
work).

The script `render.py` contains the core logic for taking input parameters (such as the test
description file) and then running gltf_viewer to produce the renderings.

In the `test` directory is a list of test descriptions that are specified in json. Please see
`sample.json` to parse the structure.

## Setting up python

The `renderdiff` project uses `python` extensively. To install the dependencies for producing
renderings, do the following step
- Set up a virtual environment (from the root directory)
  ```
  python3 -m venv venv
  . ./venv/bin/activate
  ```
- Install the rendering dependencies
  ```
  pip install -r test/renderdiff/src/rendering_requirements.txt
  ```
- Install the viewer depdencies
  ```
  pip install -r test/renderdiff/src/viewer_requirements.txt
  ```
- For the commands in the following section, do not exit the virtual environment. Once you've
  completed all your work, you can exit with
  ```
  deactivate
  ```

## Running the test locally

- To run the same presbumit as [`test-renderdiff`](presubmit-renderdiff), you can do
  ```
  bash test/renderdiff/local_test.sh
  ```
- This script will generate the renderings based on the current state of your repo.
  Additionally, it will also compare the generated images with corresponding images in the
  golden repo.
- To just render without running the test, you could use the following script
  ```
  bash test/renderdiff/generate.sh
  ```

## Filtering Tests

You can run a subset of the tests by passing the `--test_filter` flag to `local_test.sh`. The
filter supports wildcards (`*`) to match test names. For example, to run all tests in the
`ClearCoat` suite, you can use the following command:

```
bash test/renderdiff/local_test.sh --test_filter='ClearCoat.*.*'
```

## Update the golden images

The golden images are stored in a github repository:
https://github.com/google/filament-assets. Filament team members should have access to write
to the repository. A typical flow for updating the goldens is to upload your changed images
into **branch** of `filament-assets`. This branch is paired with a PR or commit on the
`filament` repo.

As an example, imagine I am working on a PR, and I've uploaded my change, which is in a
branch called `my-pr-branch`, to `filament`. This PR requires updating the golden. We would do
it in the following fashion

### Using a script to update the golden repo

- Run interactive mode in the `update_golden.py` script.
  ```
  python3 test/renderdiff/src/update_golden.py
  ```
- This will guide you through a series of steps to push the changes to a remote branch on
  `filament-assets`.

### Manually updating the golden repo

- Check out the golden repo
  ```
  git clone git@github.com:google/filament-assets.git
  ```
- Create a branch on the golden repo
  ```
  cd filament-assets
  git switch -c my-pr-branch-golden
  ```
- Copy the new images to their appropriate place in `filament-assets`
- Push the `filament-assets` working branch to remote
  ```
  git push origin my-pr-branch-golden
  ```
- In the commit message of your working branch on `filament`, add the following line
  ```
  RDIFF_BBRANCH=my-pr-branch-golden
  ```

Doing the above has multiple effects:
- The presubmit test [`test-renderdiff`][presubmit-renderdiff] will test against the provided
  branch of the golden repo (i.e. `my-pr-branch-golden`).
- If the PR is merged, then there is another workflow that will merge `my-pr-branch-golden`
  to the `main` branch of the golden repo.

## Viewing test results

We provide a viewer for looking at the result of a test run. The viewer is a webapp that can
be used by pointing your browser to a localhost port. If you input the viewer with a PR or a
directory, it will parse the test result and show the results and the rendered and/or golden
images.

![Viewer](docs/images/renderdiff_example.png)

To run the viewer of a test output directory that has been generated locally, you would run
the following

```
python3 test/renderdiff/src/viewer.py --diff=[test output]
```

where `[test output]` is a directory containing the `compare_results.json` of the test run.
For example, it could be `out/renderdiff/diffs/presubmit` for the standard path to the
`presubmit` test output.

To see the results of a Pull Request initiated test run, you would do the following

```
python3 test/renderdiff/src/viewer.py --pr_number=[PR #] --github_token=[github token]
```

where `[PR #]` is the numeric ID of your pull request, and the `[github token]` is an acess
token that you (as a github user) needs to generate ([reference][github_token_ref]).

To see the results of a specific run, you would do the following

```
python3 test/renderdiff/src/viewer.py --run_number=[RUN #] --github_token=[github token]
```

where `[RUN #]` is the numeric ID of the run. You can find the run number in the URL of the
GitHub Actions page. For example, in the URL
`https://github.com/google/filament/actions/runs/18023632663/job/51286323708?pr=9264`,
the run number is `18023632663`.

[github_token_ref]: https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens
[Mesa]: https://docs.mesa3d.org
[SwiftShader]: https://github.com/google/swiftshader
[presubmit-renderdiff]: https://github.com/google/filament/blob/e85dfe75c86106a05019e13ccdbef67e030af675/.github/workflows/presubmit.yml#L118
